
 Copyright 1989 by Georgia Tech Research Corporation, Atlanta, GA.
 Copyright 1988, 1989 by Robert Viduya.

                         All Rights Reserved


Two things to do before compiling and installing 3270tool:

	1.	Copy 3270.font to wherever you want to keep it.  It's the
		vfont file that 3270tool requires to run.  Change the
		definition for FONT3270 in the Makefile to point to this file.
		Also change the man page FILES section.

	2.	If you're compiling on a system with a type-4 keyboard,
		add "-DTYPE4KBD" to the CFLAGS defintion in the Makefile.
		This enables the special keyboard mapping described in
		the manual page.
	
To compile:
	make

To install:
	make install


Notes:

3270tool was written as a replacement for tn3270 after I got tired of
having to remember all the key mappings.  I fanatically wrote it to be as
close to a 3278 as possible.  The font used was created by peering
through a magnifying glass at a real IBM terminal and copying the
symbols pixel by pixel.  The font encoding doesn't use EBCDIC, but
instead matches the 3270 character generator as documented in chapter
12 in the "3270 Information Display System - Character Set Reference"
manual.  This actually made some operations easier.  The drawback is
that incoming characters have to be mapped from EBCDIC to the internal
map.  Other manuals used were "3270 Information Display System - Data
Stream Programmer's Reference" and "3270 Information Display System -
3278 Display Station Operator's Guide".  These manuals, particularly
the Programmer's Reference, are not for casual reading.

Some future enhancements would be nice.  Emulating a real 3270 light
pen with the mouse wouldn't be difficult.  Supporting different models
of the 3278 so that Erase/Write-Alternate commands changes the screen
size would be a little more difficult.  I don't have a color sun, so I
didn't put in color.  Basic four color support shouldn't be that hard
to add.  Extended Field Attributes and Character Attributes are not
supported as well as Programmed Symbol Sets and Partitions.  A
monochrome sun is capable of handling most of these, a color sun
is capable of handling all of them.  Printer support would also be nice.
